There are a few MMU implementation details
we can tweak for more efficiency or functionality.
In our simple page-map implementation, the
full page map occupies some number of physical
pages.
Using the numbers shown here, if each page
map entry occupies one word of main memory,
we'd need 2^20 words (or 2^10 pages) to hold
the page table.
If we have multiple contexts, we would need
multiple page tables, and the demands on our
physical memory resources would start to get
large.
The MMU implementation shown here uses a hierarchical
page map.
The top 10 bits of virtual address are used
to access a "page directory", which indicates
the physical page that holds the page map
for that segment of the virtual address space.
The key idea is that the page map segments
are in virtual memory, i.e., they don't all
have to be resident at any given time.
If the running application is only actively
using a small portion of its virtual address
space, we may only need a handful of pages
to hold the page directory and the necessary
page map segments.
The resultant savings really add up when there
are many applications, each with their own
context.
In this example, note that the middle entries
in the page directory, i.e., the entries corresponding
to the as-yet unallocated virtual memory between
the stack and heap, are all marked as not
resident.
.133 So no page map resources need be devoted
to holding a zillion page map entries all
marked "not resident".
Accessing the page map now requires two access
to main memory (first to the page directory,
then to the appropriate segment of the page
map),
but the TLB makes the impact of that additional
access negligible.
Normally when changing contexts, the OS would
reload the page-table pointer to point to
the appropriate page table (or page table
directory if we adopt the scheme from the
previous slide).
Since this context switch in effect changes
all the entries in the page table, the OS
would also have to invalidate all the entries
in the TLB cache.
This naturally has a huge impact on the TLB
hit ratio and the average memory access time
takes a huge hit because of the all page map
accesses that are now necessary until the
TLB is refilled.
To reduce the impact of context switches,
some MMUs include a context-number register
whose contents are concatenated with the virtual
page number to form the query to the TLB.
Essentially this means that the tag field
in the TLB cache entries will expand to include
the context number provided at the time the
TLB entry was filled.
To switch contexts, the OS would now reload
both the context-number register and the page-table
pointer.
With a new context number, entries in the
TLB for other contexts would no longer match,
so no need to flush the TLB on a context switch.
If the TLB has sufficient capacity to cache
the VPN-to-PPN mappings for several contexts,
context switches would no longer have a substantial
impact on average memory access time.
Finally, let's return to the question about
how to incorporate both a cache and an MMU
into our memory system.
The first choice is to place the cache between
the CPU and the MMU, i.e., the cache would
work on virtual addresses.
This seems good: the cost of the VPN-to-PPN
translation is only incurred on a cache miss.
The difficulty comes when there's a context
switch, which changes the effective contents
of virtual memory.
After all that was the point of the context
switch, since we want to switch execution
to another program.
But that means the OS would have to invalidate
all the entries in the cache when performing
a context switch, which makes the cache miss
ratio quite large until the cache is refilled.
So once again the performance impact of a
context switch would be quite high.
We can solve this problem by caching physical
addresses, i.e., placing the cache between
the MMU and main memory.
Thus the contents of the cache are unaffected
by context switches -
the requested physical addresses will be different,
but the cache handles that in due course.
The downside of this approach is that we have
to incur the cost of the MMU translation before
we can start the cache access, slightly increasing
the average memory access time.
But if we're clever we don't have to wait
for the MMU to finish before starting the
access to the cache.
To get started, the cache needs the line number
from the virtual address in order to fetch
the appropriate cache line.
If the address bits used for the line number
are completely contained in the page offset
of the virtual address, these bits are unaffected
by the MMU translation,
and so the cache lookup can happen in parallel
with the MMU operation.
Once the cache lookup is complete, the tag
field of the cache line can be compared with
the appropriate bits of the physical address
produced by the MMU.
If there was a TLB hit in the MMU, the physical
address should be available at about the same
time as the tag field produced by the cache
lookup.
By performing the MMU translation and cache
lookup in parallel, there's usually no impact
on the average memory access time!
Voila, the best of both worlds: a physically
addressed cache that incurs no time penalty
for MMU translation.
One final detail: one way to increase the
capacity of the cache is to increase the number
of cache lines and hence the number of bits
of address used as the line number.
Since we want the line number to fit into
the page offset field of the virtual address,
we're limited in how many cache lines we can
have.
The same argument applies to increasing the
block size.
So to increase the capacity of the cache our
only option is to increase the cache associativity,
which adds capacity without affecting the
address bits used for the line number.
That's it for our discussion of virtual memory.
We use the MMU to provide the context for
mapping virtual addresses to physical addresses.
By switching contexts we can create the illusion
of many virtual address spaces, so many programs
can share a single CPU and physical memory
without interfering with each other.
We discussed using a page map to translate
virtual page numbers to physical page numbers.
To save costs, we located the page map in
physical memory and used a TLB to eliminate
the cost of accessing the page map for most
virtual memory accesses.
Access to a non-resident page causes a page
fault exception, allowing the OS to manage
the complexities of equitably sharing physical
memory across many applications.
We saw that providing contexts was the first
step towards creating virtual machines, which
is the topic of our next lecture.